.. _simulation_models_label:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Simulation models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For a more detailed representation of temperature effects and pressure losses in the district
heating network, linear optimization models do not suffice. In this situation, a simulation model
can be the right choice.

Scope
-----

The following questions can be addressed using a simulation model:

* How do the heat losses in the network depend on the temperatures of feed and return pipes and
  ambient temperature?
* How much energy is necessary for the pumps to overcome the pressure losses in the network?
* How do these properties behave if the supply temperatures change?

To answer these questions, data has to be present or assumptions have to be made about the pipe's
physical properties and the temperature drop at the consumers. Have a look at the
:ref:`overview table <simulation_model_table_label>` to learn about all the variables and
parameters involved.

Conversely, if these are not known, running an optimization model would be the better choice. It
is also possible to couple the two approaches, running an optimization first and then investigating
the detailed physical behaviour. To learn about this option, please refer to the section
:ref:`model coupling <model_coupling_label>`.

Currently, the available simulation model does not handle transient states (i.e. propagation of temperature fronts
through the pipes). The model evaluates a steady state of the hydraulic and thermal
physical equations. This also means that consecutive time steps are modelled independently and the
behaviour of thermal storages cannot be represented. A dynamic simulation model may be implemented
at a later point in time.


Usage
-----

.. code-block:: txt

    tree
    ├── consumers.csv
    ├── edges.csv
    ├── forks.csv
    ├── producers.csv
    └── sequences
        ├── consumers-mass_flow.csv
        └── consumers-temperature_drop.csv

.. code-block:: python

    import dhnx

    thermal_network = dhnx.network.ThermalNetwork()

    thermal_network.simulate()


.. 	figure:: _static/radial_network_details.svg
   :width: 70 %
   :alt: radial_network_details.svg
   :align: left

   Fig. 1: Schematic





Underlying Concept
------------------

.. _simulation_model_table_label:

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :delim: ;
   :file: _static/simulation_models.csv



The following equations are related to a single pipe.

Hydraulic equations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A pressure difference between two ends of a pipe occurs because of three effects:

* distributed pressure losses along the pipe's inner surface
* local pressure losses at distinct items,
* hydrostatic pressure differences because of a difference in height.

All three effects can be captured in this formula:

.. math::
    \Delta p = \Delta p_{loc} + \Delta p_{dis} + \Delta p_{hydrostatic}

**Distributed pressure losses**

The Darcy-Weissbach-equation describes distributed pressure losses
:math:`\Delta p_{dis}` inside the pipe:

.. math::
    \Delta p_{dis} = \lambda \rho \frac{L}{2D} v^2.


Together with the flow velocity

.. math::
    v = \frac{4 \dot{m}}{\rho \pi D^2}

it can be written to:

.. math::
    \Delta p_{dis} = \lambda \frac{8 L}{\rho \pi^2 D^5} \dot{m}^2,


where the darcy friction factor :math:`\lambda = \lambda(Re, \epsilon, D)` depends on the Reynolds number
:math:`Re:`, the pipe's surface roughness :math:`\epsilon` and the pipe’s inner diameter :math:`D`.
The Reynolds number is a dimensionless quantity characterizing fluid flows and is defined as follows:

.. math::
    Re = \frac{Dv\rho}{\mu}.

:math:`\mu` is the dynamic viscosity of water.

In a pipe, flow is laminar if :math:`Re` < 2300 and turbulent if :math:`Re` > 4000.
In district heating pipes, flow is usually turbulent. The turbulent flow regime can be further
distinguished into smooth, intermediate and rough regime depending on the pipe's surface roughness.

In Bordin2015 :math:`\lambda` is calculated using the approximation formula:

.. math::
    \lambda = 0.07 \cdot Re ^{-0.13} \cdot D^{-0.14}.

A more accurate approximation of the Colebrook-White-equation for flow in pipes is given by this
formula:

.. math::
    \lambda = \frac{1.325}{(ln(\frac{\epsilon}{3.7D} + \frac{5.74}{Re^{0.9}}))^2}.

**Local pressure losses**

Local pressure losses are losses at junction elements, angles, valves etc. They are described by
the localized pressure loss coefficient :math:`\zeta`:

.. math::
    \Delta p_{loc} = \zeta \frac{v^2}{2} \rho
It is assumed that each fork has a tee and each consumer has a valve installed.

**Hydrostatic pressure difference**

The hydrostatic pressure difference is calculated as follows:
.. math::
    \Delta p_{hydrostatic} = - \rho g \Delta h


**Pump power**

Mass flow in the pipes is driven by a pressure difference that is generated by the pumps.
They maintain the pressure losses inside the pipes. Pump power thus depends on the pressure losses
:math:`\Delta p`, the mass flow :math:`\dot{m}` and the efficiency
:math:`\eta_{pump} = \eta_{el} \cdot \eta_{hyd}` of the pumps.

.. math::
    P_{el. pump} = \frac{1}{\eta_{el}\eta_{hyd}}\frac{\Delta p }{\rho} \dot{m}


Thermal equations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The temperature spread defines the amount of heat that is transported with a given mass flow:

.. math::
    \dot{Q} = \dot{m} \cdot c \cdot \Delta T.


A larger temperature spread allows smaller pipe's diameters, which reduces the
investment cost of new pipes or increases the thermal power of existing pipes.

**Heat losses**

Heat losses depend on temperature level, mass flow and pipe insulation.
Especially the representation of the heat losses depends a lot on the level of detail of a model.
As mentioned above, the current implementation treats the thermal beaviour as steady state.
The temperature at the outlet is calculated as follows:

.. math::
    T_{out} = T_{env} + (T_{in} - T_{env}) \cdot exp\{-\frac{U \pi D L}{c \cdot \dot{m}}\}.


Where :math:`T_{in}` and :math:`T_{out}` are the temperatures at the start and end of the pipe,
:math:`T_{env}` the environmental temperature and :math:`U` the thermal transmittance.

.. math::
    U_{spez} = U \cdot \pi D &\text{\hspace{1cm} for single pipes}\\
    U_{spez} = U \cdot 2 \pi D &\text{\hspace{1cm} for double pipes}

In data documentation of district heating pipes, you ofter find the value for the specific heat
loss per meter :math:`U_{spez} [W/(K m)]`.


References
----------
